THE WHITE PIGEON.

The little town of Somerville, in Ireland, has, within these few years,
assumed the neat and cheerful appearance of an English village.  Mr.
Somerville, to whom this town belongs, wished to inspire his tenantry
with a taste for order and domestic happiness, and took every means in
his power to encourage industrious, well behaved people to settle in his
neighbourhood.  When he had finished building a row of good slated houses
in his town, he declared that he would let them to the best tenants he
could find, and proposals were publicly sent to him from all parts of the
country.

By the best tenants, Mr. Somerville did not, however, mean the best
bidders; and many, who had offered an extravagant price for the houses,
were surprised to find their proposals rejected.  Amongst these was Mr.
Cox, an alehouse keeper, who did not bear a very good character.

"Please your honour, sir," said he to Mr. Somerville, "I expected, since
I bid as fair and fairer for it than any other, that you would have let
me the house next the apothecary's.  Was not it fifteen guineas I
mentioned in my proposal? and did not your honour give it against me for
thirteen?"

"My honour did just so," replied Mr. Somerville, calmly.

"And please your honour, but I don't know what it is I or mine have done
to offend you.  I'm sure there is not a gentleman in all Ireland I'd go
further to sarve.  Would not I go to Cork to-morrow for the least word
from your honour?"

"I am much obliged to you, Mr. Cox, but I have no business at Cork at
present," answered Mr. Somerville, drily.

"It is all I wish," exclaimed Mr. Cox, "that I could find out and light
upon the man that has belied me to your honour."

"No man has belied you, Mr. Cox, but your nose belies you much, if you do
not love drinking a little, and your black eye and cut chin belie you
much if you do not love quarrelling a little."

"Quarrel!  I quarrel, please your honour!  I defy any man, or set of men,
ten mile round, to prove such a thing, and I am ready to fight him that
dares to say the like of me.  I'd fight him here in your honour's
presence, if he'd only come out this minute, and meet me like a man."

Here Mr. Cox put himself into a boxing attitude, but observing that Mr.
Somerville looked at his threatening gesture with a smile, and that
several people, who had gathered round him as he stood in the street,
laughed at the proof he gave of his peaceable disposition, he changed his
attitude, and went on to vindicate himself against the charge of
drinking.

"And as to drink, please your honour, there's no truth in it.  Not a drop
of whisky, good or bad, have I touched these six months, except what I
took with Jemmy M'Doole the night I had the misfortune to meet your
honour coming home from the fair of Ballynagrish."

To this speech Mr. Somerville made no answer, but turned away to look at
the bow window of a handsome new inn, which the glazier was at this
instant glazing.  "Please your honour, that new inn is not let, I hear,
as yet," resumed Mr. Cox; "if your honour recollects, you promised to
make me a compliment of it last Seraphtide was twelvemonth."

"Impossible!" cried Mr. Somerville, "for I had no thoughts of building an
inn at that time."

"Oh, I beg your honour's pardon but if you'd be just pleased to
recollect, it was coming through the gap in the bog meadows, FORENENT
Thady O'Connor, you made me the promise--I'll leave it to him, so I
will."

"But I will not leave it to him, I assure you," cried Mr. Somerville; "I
never made any such promise.  I never thought of letting this inn to
you."

"Then your honour won't let me have it?"

"No, you have told me a dozen falsehoods.  I do not wish to have you for
a tenant."

"Well, God bless your honour; I've no more to say, but God bless your
honour," said Mr. Cox; and he walked away, muttering to himself, as he
slouched his hat over his face, "I hope I'll live to be revenged on him!"

Mr. Somerville the next morning went with his family to look at the new
inn, which he expected to see perfectly finished; but he was met by the
carpenter, who, with a rueful face, informed him that six panes of glass
in the large bow-window had been broken during the night.

"Ha! perhaps Mr. Cox has broken my windows, in revenge for my refusing to
let him my house," said Mr. Somerville; and many of the neighbours, who
knew the malicious character of this Mr. Cox, observed that this was like
one of his tricks.  A boy of about twelve years old, however, stepped
forward and said, "I don't like Mr. Cox, I'm sure; for once he beat me
when he was drunk; but, for all that, no one should be accused
wrongfully.  He could not be the person that broke these windows last
night, for he was six miles off.  He slept at his cousin's last night,
and he has not returned home yet.  So I think he knows nothing of the
matter."

Mr. Somerville was pleased with the honest simplicity of this boy, and
observing that he looked in eagerly at the staircase, when the house door
was opened, he asked him whether he would like to go in and see the new
house.  "Yes, sir," said the boy, "I should like to go up those stairs,
and to see what I should come to."

"Up with you, then!" said Mr. Somerville; and the boy ran up the stairs.
He went from room to room with great expressions of admiration and
delight.  At length, as he was examining one of the garrets, he was
startled by a fluttering noise over his head; and looking up, he saw a
white pigeon, who, frightened at his appearance, began to fly round and
round the room, till it found its way out of the door, and flew into the
staircase.

The carpenter was speaking to Mr. Somerville upon the landing-place of
the stairs; but, the moment he spied the white pigeon, he broke off in
the midst of a speech about THE NOSE of the stairs, and exclaimed, "There
he is, please your honour!  There's he that has done all the damage to
our bow-window--that's the very same wicked white pigeon that broke the
church windows last Sunday was se'nnight; but he's down for it now; we
have him safe, and I'll chop his head off, as he deserves, this minute."

"Stay!  O stay! don't chop his head off:  he does not deserve it," cried
the boy, who came running out of the garret with the greatest eagerness--
"_I_ broke your window, sir," said he to Mr. Somerville.  "I broke your
window with this ball; but I did not know that I had done it, till this
moment, I assure you, or I should have told you before.  Don't chop his
head off," added the boy to the carpenter, who had now the white pigeon
in his hands.

"No," said Mr. Somerville, "the pigeon's head shall not be chopped off,
nor yours either, my good boy, for breaking a window.  I am persuaded by
your open, honest countenance, that you are speaking the truth; but pray
explain this matter to us; for you have not made it quite clear.  How
happened it that you could break my windows without knowing it? and how
came you to find it out at last?"

"Sir," said the boy, "if you'll come up here, I'll show you all I know,
and how I came to know it."

Mr. Somerville followed the boy into the garret, who pointed to a pane of
glass that was broken in a small window that looked out upon a piece of
waste ground behind the house.  Upon this piece of waste ground the
children of the village often used to play.  "We were playing there at
ball yesterday evening," continued the boy, addressing himself to Mr.
Somerville, "and one of the lads challenged me to hit a mark in the wall,
which I did; but he said I did not hit it, and bade me give him up my
ball as the forfeit.  This I would not do; and when he began to wrestle
with me for it, I threw the ball, as I thought, over the house.  He ran
to look for it in the street, but could not find it, which I was very
glad of; but I was very sorry just now to find it myself lying upon this
heap of shavings, sir, under this broken window; for, as soon as I saw it
lying there, I knew I must have been the person that broke the window;
and through this window came the white pigeon.  Here's one of his white
feathers sticking in the gap."

"Yes," said the carpenter, "and in the bow-window room below there's
plenty of his feathers to be seen; for I've just been down to look.  It
was the pigeon broke THEM windows, sure enough."

"But he could not have got in had I not broke this little window," said
the boy, eagerly; "and I am able to earn sixpence a day, and I'll pay for
all the mischief, and welcome.  The white pigeon belongs to a poor
neighbour, a friend of ours, who is very fond of him, and I would not
have him killed for twice as much money."

"Take the pigeon, my honest, generous lad," said Mr. Somerville, "and
carry him back to your neighbour.  I forgive him all the mischief he has
done me, tell your friend, for your sake.  As to the rest, we can have
the windows mended; and do you keep all the sixpences you earn for
yourself."

"That's what he never did yet," said the carpenter.  "Many's the sixpence
he earns, but not a halfpenny goes into his own pocket:  it goes every
farthing to his poor father and mother.  Happy for them to have such a
son!"

"More happy for him to have such a father and mother," exclaimed the boy.
"Their good days they took all the best care of me that was to be had for
love or money, and would, if I would let them, go on paying for my
schooling now, falling as they be in the world; but I must learn to mind
the shop now.  Good morning to you, sir; and thank you kindly," said he
to Mr. Somerville.

"And where does this boy live, and who are his father and mother?  They
cannot live in town," said Mr. Somerville, "or I should have heard of
them."

"They are but just come into the town, please your honour," said the
carpenter.  "They lived formerly upon Counsellor O'Donnel's estate; but
they were ruined, please your honour, by taking a joint lease with a man,
who fell afterwards into bad company, ran out all he had, so could not
pay the landlord; and these poor people were forced to pay his share and
their own too, which almost ruined them.  They were obliged to give up
the land; and now they have furnished a little shop in this town with
what goods they could afford to buy with the money they got by the sale
of their cattle and stock.  They have the good-will of all who know them;
and I am sure I hope they will do well.  The boy is very ready in the
shop, though he said only that he could earn sixpence a day.  He writes a
good hand, and is quick at casting up accounts, for his age.  Besides, he
is likely to do well in the world, because he is never in idle company,
and I've known him since he was two foot high, and never heard of his
telling a lie."

"This is an excellent character of the boy, indeed," said Mr. Somerville,
"and from his behaviour this morning I am inclined to think that he
deserves all your praises."

Mr. Somerville resolved to inquire more fully concerning this poor
family, and to attend to their conduct himself, fully determined to
assist them if he should find them such as they had been represented.

In the meantime, this boy, whose name was Brian O'Neill, went to return
the white pigeon to its owner.  "You have saved its life," said the woman
to whom it belonged, "and I'll make you a present of it."  Brian thanked
her; and he from that day began to grow fond of the pigeon.  He always
took care to scatter some oats for it in his father's yard; and the
pigeon grew so tame at last that it would hop about the kitchen, and eat
off the same trencher with the dog.

Brian, after the shop was shut up at night, used to amuse himself with
reading some little books which the schoolmaster who formerly taught him
arithmetic was so good as to lend him.  Amongst these he one evening met
with a little book full of the history of birds and beasts; he looked
immediately to see whether the pigeon was mentioned amongst the birds,
and, to his great joy, he found a full description and history of his
favourite bird.

"So, Brian, I see your schooling has not been thrown away upon you; you
like your book, I see, when you have no master over you to bid you read,"
said his father, when he came in and saw Brian reading his book very
attentively.

"Thank you for having me taught to read, father," said Brian.  "Here I've
made a great discovery:  I've found out in this book, little as it looks,
father, a most curious way of making a fortune; and I hope it will make
your fortune, father; and if you'll sit down, I'll tell it to you."

Mr. O'Neill, in hopes of pleasing his son rather than in the expectation
of having his fortune made, immediately sat down to listen; and his son
explained to him, that he had found in his book an account of pigeons who
carried notes and letters:  "and, father," continued Brian, "I find my
pigeon is of this sort; and I intend to make my pigeon carry messages.
Why should not he?  If other pigeons have done so before him, I think he
is as good, and, I daresay, will be as easy to teach as any pigeon in the
world.  I shall begin to teach him to-morrow morning; and then, father,
you know people often pay a great deal for sending messengers; and no boy
can run, no horse can gallop, so fast as a bird can fly; therefore the
bird must be the best messenger, and I should be paid the best price.
Hey, father?"

"To be sure, to be sure, my boy," said his father, laughing; "I wish you
may make the best messenger in Ireland of your pigeon; but all I beg, my
dear boy, is that you won't neglect our shop for your pigeon; for I've a
notion we have a better chance of making a fortune by the shop than by
the white pigeon."

Brian never neglected the shop; but in his leisure hours he amused
himself with training his pigeon; and after much patience he at last
succeeded so well, that one day he went to his father and offered to send
him word by his pigeon what beef was a pound in the market of
Ballynagrish, where he was going.

"The pigeon will be home long before me, father; and he will come in at
the kitchen window, and light upon the dresser; then you must untie the
little note which I shall have tied under his left wing, and you'll know
the price of beef directly."

The pigeon carried his message well; and Brian was much delighted with
his success.  He soon was employed by the neighbours, who were aroused by
Brian's fondness of his swift messenger; and soon the fame of the white
pigeon was spread amongst all who frequented the markets and fairs of
Somerville.

At one of these fairs a set of men of desperate fortunes met to drink,
and to concert plans of robberies.  Their place of meeting was at the
ale-house of Mr. Cox, the man who, as our readers may remember, was
offended by Mr. Somerville's hinting that he was fond of drinking and of
quarrelling, and who threatened vengeance for having been refused the new
inn.

Whilst these men were talking over their scheme, one of them observed,
that one of their companions was not arrived.  Another said, "No."  "He's
six miles off," said another; and a third wished that he could make him
hear at that distance.  This turned the discourse upon the difficulties
of sending messages secretly and quickly.  Cox's son, a lad of about
nineteen, who was one of this gang, mentioned the white carrier-pigeon,
and he was desired to try all means to get it into his possession.
Accordingly, the next day young Cox went to Brian O'Neill, and tried, at
first by persuasion and afterwards by threats, to prevail upon him to
give up the pigeon.  Brian was resolute in his refusal, more especially
when the petitioner began to bully him.

"If we can't have it by fair means, we will by foul," said Cox; and a few
days afterwards the pigeon was gone.  Brian searched for it in vain--
inquired from all the neighbours if they had seen it, and applied, but to
no purpose, to Cox.  He swore that he knew nothing about the matter.  But
this was false, for it was he who during the night-time had stolen the
white pigeon.  He conveyed it to his employers, and they rejoiced that
they had gotten it into their possession, as they thought it would serve
them for a useful messenger.

Nothing can be more shortsighted than cunning.  The very means which
these people took to secure secrecy were the means of bringing their
plots to light.  They endeavoured to teach the pigeon, which they had
stolen, to carry messages for them in a part of the country at some
distance from Somerville; and when they fancied that it had forgotten its
former habits, and its old master, they thought that they might venture
to employ him nearer home.  The pigeon, however, had a better memory than
they imagined.  They loosed him from a bag near the town of Ballynagrish
in hopes that he would stop at the house of Cox's cousin, which was on
its road between Ballynagrish and Somerville.  But the pigeon, though he
had been purposely fed at this house for a week before this trial, did
not stop there, but flew on to his old master's house in Somerville, and
pecked at the kitchen window, as he had formerly been taught to do.  His
father, fortunately, was within hearing, and poor Brian ran with the
greatest joy to open the window and to let him in.

"O, father, here's my white pigeon come back of his own accord,"
exclaimed Brian; "I must run and show him to my mother."  At this instant
the pigeon spread his wings, and Brian discovered under one of its wings
a small and very dirty looking billet.  He opened it in his father's
presence.  The scrawl was scarcely legible; but these words were at
length deciphered:--

"Thare are eight of uz sworn; I send yo at botom thare names.  We meat at
tin this nite at my faders, and have harms and all in radiness to brak
into the grate 'ouse.  Mr. Summervill is to lye out to nite--kip the
pigeon untill to-morrow.  For ever yours,     MURTAGH COX, JUN."

Scarcely had they finished reading this note, than both father and son
exclaimed, "Let us go and show it to Mr. Somerville."  Before they set
out, they had, however, the prudence to secure the pigeon, so that he
should not be seen by anyone but themselves.  Mr. Somerville, in
consequence of this fortunate discovery, took proper measures for the
apprehension of the eight men who had sworn to rob his house.  When they
were all safely lodged in the county gaol, he sent for Brian O'Neill and
his father; and after thanking them for the service they had done him, he
counted out ten bright guineas upon a table, and pushed them towards
Brian, saying, "I suppose you know that a reward of ten guineas was
offered some weeks ago for the discovery of John Mac Dermod, one of the
eight men whom we have just taken up?"

"No, sir," said Brian; "I did not know it, and I did not bring that note
to you to get ten guineas, but because I thought it was right.  I don't
want to be paid for doing it."

"That's my own boy," said his father.  "We thank you, sir; but we'll not
take the money; I DON'T LIKE TO TAKE THE PRICE OF BLOOD."

"I know the difference, my good friends," said Mr. Somerville, "between
vile informers and courageous, honest men."

"Why, as to that, please your honour, though we are poor, I hope we are
honest."

"And, what is more," said Mr. Somerville, "I have a notion that you would
continue to be honest, even if you were rich.  Will you, my good lad,"
continued Mr. Somerville, after a moment's pause--"will you trust me with
your pigeon a few days?"

"O, and welcome, sir," said the boy, with a smile; and he brought the
pigeon to Mr. Somerville when it was dark, and nobody saw him.

A few days afterwards, Mr. Somerville called at O'Neill's house, and bid
him and his son follow him.  They followed till he stopped opposite to
the bow-window of the new inn.  The carpenter had just put up a sign,
which was covered over with a bit of carpeting.

"Go up the ladder, will you?" said Mr. Somerville to Brian, "and pull
that sign straight, for it hangs quite crooked.  There, now it is
straight.  Now pull off the carpet, and let us see the new sign."

The boy pulled off the cover, and saw a white pigeon painted upon the
sign, and the name of O'Neill in large letters underneath.

"Take care you do not tumble down and break your neck upon this joyful
occasion," said Mr. Somerville, who saw that Brian's surprise was too
great for his situation.  "Come down from the ladder, and wish your
father joy of being master of the new inn called the 'White Pigeon.'  And
I wish him joy of having such a son as you are.  Those who bring up their
children well, will certainly be rewarded for it, be they poor or rich."